# cartogram-docker and cartogram-web

## Setting Up Development Environment

The development setup enables hot-reloading, allowing you to see code changes reflected in the website in real-time.

1. Follow step 1 - 6 in setting up [Local Docker Deployment](/tutorials/local)

2. Initialize and update the submodules using the following command in `cartogram-docker` folder:

```shell script
git submodule update --init --recursive
```

3. [Install Node.js](https://nodejs.org).

4. Start frontend development server:

```shell script
cd cartogram-web/frontend
npm install
npm run dev
```

Please note that the URL generated by this command will not display anything. Simply proceed to the next step.

5. Next, open **another** terminal and run the following commands in the root directory of this repository (i.e., the folder containing this readme):

```shell script
cd cartogram-docker
bash cartogram-web/tools/pull-executable.sh
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml up
```

The first command pulls the same version of the executable (provided by [cartogram-cpp](https://github.com/mgastner/cartogram-cpp)) as required by currently checked-out HEAD of the `cartograb-web` submodule.

The second command starts all the services (i.e. docker containers) listed in `docker-compose-dev.yml` under the `web` profile (`web`, `redis`, and `postgres`), while ensuring the same image of `cartogram-web` is pulled as the submodule's version. We achive this by making sure the short SHA of the submodule's HEAD is the same as the docker image's tag.

Once all the Docker containers have started, their output will be displayed in the terminal window you opened in step 5. This window will let you monitor how the web application responds to requests and identify any errors. You can access the locally running go-cart.io website at [http://localhost:5001](http://localhost:5001).

6. To update to the latest code (which may be error-prone), run the following commands:

```shell script
cd cartogram-web
bash tools/pull-executable.sh --latest
git checkout dev
```

When you make changes to the code in the `cartogram-web` repository, their respective servers will reload automatically when you save your changes. When you make changes to the code in the `cartogram-docker` repository, you should restart the docker compose:

```shell script
docker compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml restart
```

When you would like to shut down the go-cart.io web application, simply press `Ctrl-C` in the terminal window you started Docker Compose and npm in. After a few moments, the state of all the Docker containers will be saved and the application will gracefully come to a halt.

## Coding standard and quality

To maintain coding standards and quality, we use Prettier and ESLint for the frontend, and Ruff for the backend.

We strongly recommend using [VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com/) for development. Open `.vscode/cartogram-docker.code-workspace`, and the IDE should handle formatting and most linting on save. Some linting issues may require manual fixes, but the IDE will automatically inform you as you code.

Otherwise, you should manually run the following command:

For frontend:

```shell script
cd cartogram-web/frontend
npm run format
npm run lint
```

For backend:

```shell script
docker exec -it cartogram-docker-web-1 /bin/bash
ruff format
ruff check --fix
```

Please fix all linting issues before commit.

## Useful tips

If you mostly are in the development mode, you may modify `.env` by replace `COMPOSE_FILE=docker-compose.yml` with `COMPOSE_FILE=docker-compose-dev.yml`. This way, you may simply use `docker compose up -d` or `docker compose up` for starting the application.

You may find the following commands useful when developing:

- `docker compose up -d` to start docker containers in the background (so you can use command line for other things);
- `docker exec -it cartogram-docker-web-1 /bin/bash` to access the cartogram-web container (so you can use the command line in the container, say to run `python addmap.py init test`);
- `docker start cartogram-docker-web-1` to start the cartogram-web container (which is useful when the container stops because of, say, an error in your python code);
- `docker logs --follow cartogram-docker-web-1` to see the logs in the cartogram-web container.

## Testing

### Tablet testing via local network

If you want to access the local instance via tablets, please follow the instructions below.

#### Windows

First, you must allow other devices to access docker. If you use wsl on Windows, you can run the following command in command prompt (may need to run as administrator):

```shell script
netsh advfirewall firewall add rule name="Allowing LAN connections" dir=in action=allow protocol=TCP localport=5001

bash.exe -c "ip -4 addr show eth0 | grep -oP '(?<=inet\s)\d+(\.\d+){3}'"

netsh interface portproxy add v4tov4 listenaddress=0.0.0.0 listenport=5001 connectaddress=<your-docker-ip> connectport=5001
```

Reference: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/61002681/connecting-to-wsl2-server-via-local-network

If you are running the application in development mode, you should allow other computher to access port 5173 (for Windows, you can see https://www.devopinion.com/access-localhost-from-another-computer-on-the-same-network/). If you cannot access 5173, check firewall, e.g., delete rules that block node.js.

You should be able to access the application using `http:\\your-local-ip:5001`

#### macOS (and iPad)

Work in progress. Contact @adisidev for help getting set up.

### Tablet testing via USB (Andriod)

Please follow this tutorial https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/remote-debugging/. Then, setup port forwarding for port 5001 and 5173, see https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/remote-debugging/local-server/.
